.Dd July 19, 2026
.Dt CNVRT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cnvrt
.Nd interactive CLI for file conversion
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl i Ar format
.Op Fl o Ar format
.Op Fl -out-dir Ar dir
.Op Fl -overwrite
.Op Fl -quality Ar value
.Op Fl -action Ar action
.Op Fl -compress
.Op Fl -resize Ar value
.Op Fl -opt Ar tool.key=value
.Op Ar file ...
.Nm
.Cm doctor | formats | backends | config | add-format | add-tool | version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
converts files between formats by driving the best available backend tool
(FFmpeg, ImageMagick, Pandoc, LibreOffice and many more).
Run without arguments it selects inputs and the output format
interactively; with arguments it converts directly, in batches, or whole
directories.
Archives are extracted or created, structured data (JSON, YAML, TOML,
CSV, ...) is converted without external tools, and same-format runs can
compress or resize instead.
.Pp
Output goes to the current directory by default.
Batches are tolerant:
supported files convert, and unsupported or failed ones are listed in the
final report together with the exact command used for each job.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "add-format"
.It Cm doctor
Check which backends are installed, what they are for, and how to install
the missing ones.
.It Cm formats
List known and config-registered formats, grouped by category.
.It Cm backends
List each backend's description, required commands and supported pairs.
.It Cm config
Interactively edit and save user settings.
.It Cm add-format
Interactively register a new format via config.
.It Cm add-tool
Interactively register a new converter tool via config.
.It Cm version
Print the version and exit (also
.Fl v ,
.Fl -version ) .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl i , Fl -input-format Ar format
Override the detected input format.
.It Fl o , Fl -output-format Ar format
Output format.
.It Fl -out-dir Ar dir
Output directory.
.It Fl -overwrite
Overwrite existing output files.
.It Fl -quality Ar value
Best-effort quality value passed to supported backends.
.It Fl -action Ar action
Same-format action:
.Ql convert ,
.Ql compress
or
.Ql resize .
.It Fl -compress
Compress same-format image output.
.It Fl -resize Ar value
Resize value for supported image and video backends, for example
.Ql 800x
or
.Ql 50% .
.It Fl -opt Ar tool.key=value
Backend option, repeatable.
For example
.Ql ffmpeg.audio_bitrate=320k
or
.Ql 7z.level=9 .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Convert one file by explicit paths:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cnvrt input.svg output.png
.Ed
.Pp
Batch-convert by format:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cnvrt -i svg -o png a.svg b.svg
.Ed
.Pp
Convert every supported file in a directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cnvrt -o png ../../
.Ed
.Pp
Create an archive, extract an archive:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cnvrt -o zip ./directory
cnvrt archive.tar.gz
.Ed
.Pp
Extract audio with a backend option:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cnvrt --opt ffmpeg.audio_bitrate=320k -o mp3 song.wav
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
The
.Cm doctor
command lists the backend tools available on this host.
.Pp
Project page:
.Lk https://github.com/shellcell/cnvrt
